









How does Shakespeare depict the concept of revenge as a driving force for the corruption of identity in the play Hamlet?











English A: Language and Literature 
Word count: 1486
William Shakespeare’s Hamlet is widely recognized as one of the greatest revenge tragedies of all time. Published in 1603, the play explores the story of Prince Hamlet who seeks to kill King Claudius as a way of avenging the death of his father. The play illustrates how Hamlet's drive for vengeance causes an erosion of  his sense of identity. This is exemplified through his madness revealing his inner turmoil, his emotional struggle with his lack of resolve, and his display of aggressive behaviour. Ultimately, Shakespeare demonstrates in Hamlet how the desire for revenge induces mental distress, resulting in the corruption of one’s identity.
	Hamlet acts in a state of madness as part of his revenge plot, yet it reveals his inner turmoil and lack of control over his emotions. This is exemplified when Hamlet, approached by Rosencrantz and Guildenstern, explains his deteriorating mental state as he puts on a facade of insanity: 
	I have of late, but
wherefore I know not, lost all my mirth, forgone all
custom of exercises, and, indeed, it goes so heavily
with my disposition that this goodly frame, the
Earth, seems to me a sterile promontory.
(2.2.318-322)
Hamlet’s grandiose speech, as seen through phrases such as “lost all” and “forgone all” demonstrate  Hamlet’s use of over-exaggeration as a way of compensating for the truth of his madness. He has, in reality, lost his ‘mirth’ and ability to see the beauty of life in the midst of his pursuit of revenge and is exaggerating his act in effort to conceal this reality. This represents his loss of identity and disconnection from humanity. Similarly, Hamlet acts in a state of madness in his soliloquy in act one, scene three, as Claudius and Polonius overhear:
	To be, or not to be, that is the question:
Whether 'tis nobler in the mind to suffer
The slings and arrows of outrageous fortune,
Or to take arms against a sea of troubles
And by opposing end them.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Soft you now,
The fair Ophelia.—Nymph, in thy orisons
Be all my sins remembered.
(3.1.64-98)
Since Hamlet abruptly halts speaking when he notices Ophelia, he believes he is alone while delivering this soliloquy. As such, he expresses the true thoughts raging in his mind. He uses an antithesis, “To be, or not to be” as he ponders the idea of suicide. This reflects Hamlet’s inability to cope with the pressures of his quest for vengeance. In this way, the soliloquy depicts his crippling emotional state and weakening sense of self as a result of his pursuit of revenge. Later in the play, Ophelia confronts Hamlet about his madness and the degradation of his character. She states, “That unmatched form and stature of blown youth / Blasted with ecstasy. O, woe is me / T’have seen what I have seen, see what I see!” (3.1.173-175). Ophelia is bewildered at how Hamlet has become so delirious; she explains how compared to his youth, his character now has been corrupted by his ecstasy, ie., his madness. In this way, Hamlet’s facade of madness has manifested itself in his character. His mental distress, as a result of his desire for revenge, has plagued his thoughts and corrupted his identity. Therefore, although Hamlet feigns madness as part of his plan to kill Claudius, it exposes his emotional instability and leads to the overall corruption of his identity. 
	Moreover, Hamlet’s obsession with the revenge of his father’s murder results in mental distress as he struggles with a lack of resolve and an inability to take action. This idea is illustrated when Hamlet criticizes himself for not being able to manifest his thoughts into reality. He states, “I could accuse me of such things that it were better my mother had not borne me: I am very proud, revengeful, ambitious, with more offenses at my beck than I have thoughts to put them in, imagination to give them shape, or time to act them in” (3.1.134-138). To Hamlet, the inability to carry out potential transgressions, despite seeking revenge, is enough for him to not be born. Hamlet’s self-deprecating tone reflects his frustration and shame, as he mentally struggles with the inability to execute his plans. This leads to a sense of indecision and lack of purpose, making it difficult for Hamlet to form a clear sense of identity. This is further reinforced by Hamlet’s comparison of himself with an actor, denouncing his lack of feeling and action in the face of his own father’s murder, whilst praising the actor's ability to evoke such strong emotions by reciting a play:
	O, what a rogue and peasant slave am I!
Is it not monstrous that this player here,
But in a fiction, in a dream of passion,
Could force his soul so to his own conceit.
(2.2.577-580)
Hamlet uses the term ‘slave’ as a way of illustrating his lack of control over his actions, and the exclamation mark emphasizes his enrage . It is evident that, despite a strong desire for revenge, Hamlet is struggling to come to terms with his lack of resolve, causing him to become increasingly aggravated. Another example of Hamlet’s lack of resolve causing him to become mentally distressed is illustrated when Hamlet encounters the Norwegian army led by Fortnibras, as they strive to conquer a piece of land. Hamlet is astonished by Fortinbras' ability to take action and ponders upon his own: 
	How stand I then,
That have a father kill’d, a mother stain’d,
Excitements of my reason and my blood,
And let all sleep?
	(4.4.59-62)
As Hamlet questions himself, he demonstrates his struggle to comprehend his impotence. He expresses disappointment in himself and feels as if there is something wrong with him. In this way, Hamlet experiences internal conflict. His negative self-discourse directly diminishes his self-respect and corrupts his sense of self. Hence, his desire for revenge is contradicted by his lack of resolve, which induces mental distress, and thus leads to the corruption of his identity. 
	Furthermore, Hamlet’s desire for revenge causes him to unleash uncontrolled aggression, demonstrating his emotional instability. In act three, scene four, Hamlet enters Gertrude’s chambers and begins to act hostile toward her. Hamlet verbally and physically confronts his mother, as he tells her she “shall not budge” and he will “set [her] up a glass” so that she can examine herself and feel guilt in marrying her brother-in-law (3.4.23-24). She feels so threatened by this that she questions, “Thou wilt not murder me? / Help, ho!” (3.4.26-27). Gertrude’s question posed to Hamlet demonstrates the degree of his anger towards her. It shows his emotional instability and aggravation, as he is overcome with the pursuit of revenge and the immoral acts of Claudius and his mother, depicting his worsening mental state and deteriorating character. As Gertrude cries out for help, Polonius echoes her cries as he hides behind the tapestry. Angered at being spied upon, Hamlet draws out his sword and stabs Polonius through the tapestry, thinking he had slain the king (3.4.29-30). In this moment, Hamlet is so overcome by his desire to avenge his father that he lashes out violently. He acts without hesitation as if he is uninterested in who might be hiding behind the tapestry. This depicts his aggression and inability to control himself amid his quest for vengeance. It demonstrates that he is no longer a man of rationality, and his identity and morality have become compromised. Another act of uncontrolled aggression occurs in the final scene of the play, in which Hamlet and Laertes duel in a fencing match. As Laertes is about to die, he confesses that Hamlet has been poisoned and will soon die, and Claudius is to blame. Upon hearing this, Hamlet takes immediate action: “The point envenomed too! Then, venom, to thy work // Here, thou incestuous, murd’rous, damnèd Dane, / Drink off this potion. Is thy union here?” (5.2.352-357). Hamlet forcefully kills Claudius, stabbing him and making him drink poison. However, he was only able to do this upon entering a state of excessive anger and acting impulsively. This suggests that Hamlet’s heightened emotional instability caused by intense anger allowed him to act in the spur of the moment and take revenge, something he would not act on before his desire for revenge. Essentially, Hamlet’s acts of aggression unveil his mental turmoil as a result of his desire for revenge. These acts are a clear indication of how his sense of self and demeanour have corrupted as Hamlet has spiralled into complete insanity. 
	Shakespeare’s Hamlet illustrates how the pursuit of revenge brings about emotional distress, leading to the degeneration of one’s identity. Through the depiction of Hamlet’s madness exposing his inner turmoil, his discontentment with his indecisiveness, and his aggressive behaviour, the play demonstrates Hamlet’s crippling sense of self. As Shakespeare details the story of a young prince on his quest to avenge his father, the playwright also delves deep into the fundamental complexities of human emotion and behaviour. The play’s themes and intricacies cement it as a literary classic. 
 

Work Cited
Shakespeare, William, and Roma Gill. Hamlet. Oxford University Press, 2007. 




