1 How does David Fincher’s film adaptation of Fight Club written by Chuck Palahniuk
represent men’s struggle to find purpose in a society driven by consumerism?
Subject: English Language and Literature, Category 3
Word Count: 3946
2 Contents
I. Background Information 3
II. Introduction 3
III. A Society Driven by Consumerism 5 Consumer Culture and Domestication 5 Emasculation due to Consumerism 8
IV. A Struggle for Attaining a Sense of Purpose 10 A Fight Against the Consumerist Lifestyle 10 The Reclamation of Identity Through Violence 11 The Rejection of Nihilism 14
V. Conclusion 15
VI. References 16
3 I. Background Information
Chuck Palaniuk’s Fight Club is widely regarded as one of the most controversial novels
of all time. Its rise in popularity was predominantly due to its film adaptation by David Fincher
which was released in 1999. Although it did poorly at the box office, the film found success with
its DVD disclosure and has since become a fan favourite. Today, the story of Fight Club has
amassed a cult following. It presents many unique themes such as consumerism and masculinity,
which deeply resonate with its audience.
This essay will specifically explore the film adaptation of the novel Fight Club, with
some emphasis on its cinematography as well as the various dramatic elements that are present.
In terms of its plot, the film adaptation of Fight Club is very similar to the novel. However, it is
particularly notable for its visual style and the way it accentuates the themes and ideas present in
the original novel. The author himself likes the film better than the book. Palahniuk stated in an
interview: “I was sort of embarrassed of the book because the movies had streamlined the plot
and made it so much more effective and made connections that I had never thought to make”
(Heffernan, 2016, p. 93). By examining the film's plot and cinematography, it will be possible to
gain a better understanding of the story of Fight Club as a whole.
II. Introduction
To begin, Fight Club explores a society that is dominated by consumer culture, similar to
contemporary Western society. In such a society, rapid technological advancement and
materialism have led to the creation of a culture where the accumulation of goods is often viewed
as a measure of personal success. In this culture, individuals are driven to acquire wealth and
material possessions, which is often at the expense of their own happiness and well-being. As a
result, many people have become distracted from the strive for personal growth, meaningful
4 relationships, and genuine self-fulfilment. The obsession with material possessions for the
purpose of attaining prestige and social standing was originally coined the term ‘conspicuous
consumption’ by sociologist Thorstein Veblen (1899). It describes how individuals in the leisure
class do not consume objects because they serve a utilitarian purpose, but rather because they
flaunt their privileged social ranking. It can then be understood that the consumption of goods
plays a fundamental role in the construction of identity, as what people buy defines who they are.
Additionally, consumerism is an ideology that directly supports capitalism, as it propels
the exchange of goods and drives economic growth (Harmanci, 2017). Despite supporting
economic expansion, consumerism has had a very negative influence on human society on an
emotional level. The story of Fight Club excellently demonstrates this negative influence, as it
presents various problems related to consumerism such as dissatisfaction, domestication, and
emasculation. In the same predicament, it challenges the values promoted by society and
presents a controversial message about what creates meaning in the lives of men living in the
modern day. It ultimately demonstrates how it is not easy for men to lead fulfilling lives in a
consumerist society, and that they must go to great lengths to achieve a sense of purpose. Hence,
Fight Club allows for an especially relevant discussion, one that relates deeply to many
individuals living in the Western world.
Thus, the aim of this essay is to analyze the question: how does David Fincher’s film
adaptation of Fight Club written by Chuck Palahniuk represent men’s struggle to find purpose in
a society driven by consumerism? To investigate this question, two parts of it must be separately
addressed. Firstly, how does Fight Club present a society driven by consumerism? Answering
this question will allow for a better understanding of the context of the film and how the film
depicts issues that arise from consumerism. Secondly, how does Fight Club represent men’s
5 struggle to find purpose in such a society? Answering this will allow for the analysis of the way
in which Fight Club seeks to tackle the issues that it presents, and the message it portrays about
fulfillment in contemporary society. Answering these questions in succession will allow for the
essay to be focused and come together to answer the research question.
III. A Society Driven by Consumerism
Fight Club, in its entirety, depicts a society that is heavily influenced by consumerism
and highlights the many issues that arise from it. As such, it is recognized as a postmodern film,
presenting numerous views and elements that are characteristic of postmodernism. According to
Bedard’s (2013) article, Postmodernism is a philosophical movement that seeks to question many
of the assumptions and values that were made in the modern era, from 1945 to 1979. Thus,
postmodern cinema criticizes beliefs regarding objective reality and society’s value systems.
Postmodern films typically have a detached and ironic view of the world. They often use
non-traditional approaches to storytelling, blending together genres or playing with the narrative
style (Bedard, 2013). Fight Club is a prime example of this. The story of Fight Club makes the
audience question the meta-narrative that contemporary society plays into. In particular, it
illustrates how people are so influenced by consumerism that they have lost a sense of purpose
and lack control over their lives.
Consumer Culture and Domestication
Throughout the story, Palaniuk strongly criticizes the consumerist lifestyle, depicting it as
one that is void of true meaning. Fight Club revolves around an unnamed character who is the
narrator of the story. He is a thirty-something, white-collar employee who works for an
automobile company. The narrator is generally doing paperwork in an office but often travels
around the country inspecting car accidents. He despises his job, yet finds now way out of it. The
6 mundane lifestyle that the narrator leads is a critique of corporate America, and suggests that the
culture of conformity and materialism is dehumanizing for individuals. It also points to the
concept of the “rat race”, where people are trapped in a cycle of working long hours in order to
obtain more money or power. The emptiness that the narrator feels at the beginning of the film is
very apparent. The only thing that makes him feel alive is swiping through IKEA’s furniture
catalogue.
Figure 1. The narrator spends his time buying furniture from IKEA (Fincher, 1999, 0:05:21).
As evident in Figure 1, the objects that surround the narrator all have a price tag and a
description. This shows the significance that the narrator places on his furniture, and illustrates
how his whole existence is surrounded by materialistic items. As he asks himself what dining set
defines him as a person, there is irony as the narrator is basing his self-worth on the external
things he consumes. Through this, Fight Club aims to show how many individuals look at
themselves and other people through a prism of material objects. This causes people to have a
superficial perception of others, defining others by what they own, rather than the content of
their character. This excellently highlights the absurdity and senselessness of consumer culture.
The narrator further explains, “Like so many others, I had become a slave to the IKEA nesting
7 instinct” (0:04:50). He is trapped in a society of rampant consumerism. His pursuit of
commodities and capitalistic idealism is an attempt to fit in with society. Yet, this leaves him
with a shallow sense of being and a lack of apparent direction. This is illustrated by his
existential nihilism and attitude towards his death at the start of the film. Whilst on a business
trip he says, “Every time the plane banked too sharply on take-off or landing, I prayed for a crash
or a mid-air collision” (0:21:32). The narrator does not mind dying and putting an end to the
mundane and unfulfilling meta-narrative he has so deeply embedded himself in. This is because,
like many others, the narrator lives a life in which tedium and domestication define his everyday
existence.
Moreover, after the narrator’s apartment is blown up and he loses all of his material
possessions, he becomes very distressed. In an attempt to explain his mental turmoil to Tyler
Durden, Tyler shuts him down and shows him the reality of consumer culture: “We’re
consumers. We are by-products of a lifestyle obsession. Murder, crime, poverty, these things
don't concern me. What concerns me are celebrity magazines, television with 500 channels, some
guy's name on my underwear” (0:30:08). In his speech to the narrator, Tyler demonstrates how
society has become brainwashed by mass media and large corporations, resulting in an obsession
with their appearance and possessions. This not only distracts them from more significant issues
that directly affect humanity such as poverty and crime, but restricts them from leading more
interesting and fulfilling lives. Fight Club suggests that the current generation, in their
self-obsessed race for individuality and material success, is unaware of the duality of their
reality. On one hand, individuals are the masters of their destinies and the most important figures
in their own lives, but on the other, they are merely irrelevant beings that constitute a society
obsessed with accumulating wealth and fitting in with consumerist norms. In this way, the film
8 portrays how individuals in Western society are driven by consumerism, and as a result, have lost
their sense of identity and purpose.
Emasculation due to Consumerism
Furthermore, Fight Club illustrates a significant issue in the consumer age: the
emasculation of men. Although emasculation refers to the removal of male sex organs, the film
highlights the metaphorical emasculation of men—the loss of their ‘true’ masculinity.
Masculinity is a gender form constructed by a given society at a given time. The film suggests
that in contemporary society, the meaning of masculinity has gone through a change, and that
men have become feminized due to consumer culture. As made clear by cultural critic Henry
Giroux (2001), Fight Club shows how the crisis of capitalism is a crisis of masculinity, and that
consumer culture has made men “domesticated…, soft and emasculated” (p. 5). The
‘consumerist masculinity’ that the narrator feels at the beginning of the film is based on
charisma, status, wealth, and possessions. These characteristics construct a sense of masculinity
that lacks meaning for the narrator and as put by Skinner Paul (2011), “[the narrator] desires a
return to an idealized post-war masculinity of the mid-twentieth-century” (p. 8). This post-war
masculinity is characterized by toughness and physicality, and what Tyler confirms is the ‘true’
masculinity.
Moreover, Fight Club argues that a consequence of the feminization of men is that they
have difficulty coping with their emotions. This is seen when the narrator struggles with
insomnia at the beginning of the film and copes with his lack of sleep by attending a support
group for men with testicular cancer. It is here that he meets Bob, an ex-bodybuilder who had to
get his testicles removed, causing him to develop a high-pitched voice and breasts. Bob
represents the physical manifestation of emasculation. The narrator finds comfort in crying into
9 Bob’s breasts, as he feels it is equivalent to the nature and protection given by a mother figure.
Figure 2. The narrator cries as he hugs Bob during a support group session (0:08:52).
Through this scene (Figure 2), the film implies that men in modern society turn to others,
especially maternal figures, in order to find comfort and alleviate their stresses. However, it
seems to mock and satirize new-age therapy for men, labelling it as a process of feminization.
Overall, with this scene in the film, Fincher could be suggesting that just like testicular cancer,
consumerist culture has taken away what traditionally makes men, men, and has caused them to
lose their toughness and emotional strength, thereby becoming emasculated. The cinematography
of this scene is also worth noting. There is soft lighting illuminating the support group in the
foreground, as hard lighting is focused on the American flag in the back of the room. This use of
lighting and positioning excellently portrays the crisis of masculinity in American society, and
represents how the identity of the American man has gone through a transformation in modern
times. It shows how a shift from post-war masculinity to consumerist masculinity has resulted in
men questioning their identity and place in the world, causing them to face issues with their
sense of self. Hence, Fight Club suggests that the feminization of men due to consumerism is
damaging and unhealthy for American and Western society as a whole.
10 Therefore, as explored in this section of the essay, Fight Club seeks to show the audience
how contemporary society is driven by consumerist ideals and how this is detrimental for men.
As illustrated through the narrator, the film depicts the domestication and emasculation of men as
the consequences of consumerism, and how these consequences lead to men struggling with their
sense of identity and attainment of purpose within their lives.
IV. A Struggle for Attaining a Sense of Purpose
As depicted earlier, the narrator’s life at the beginning of the film is tedious, meaningless,
and unfulfilling. He desires freedom from the shackles of the consumerist lifestyle as well as a
sense of direction in his life. The narrator's imaginary alter ego, Tyler Durden is the
manifestation of his desires. Tyler represents a solution to all the issues that surround the narrator
like dissatisfaction, emasculation, and domestication, and takes him on a quest to attain a sense
of purpose. In this way, Fight Club, through Tyler Durden, presents a message about what creates
a sense of purpose in the lives of men and how they seek to attain this purpose whilst living in a
consumerist society.
A Fight Against the Consumerist Lifestyle
Tyler starts by telling the narrator that the rampant consumerism he has embedded
himself in must be rejected and that he must free himself from his obsession with material
possessions. Tyler’s way of finding freedom in a consumerist society is by completely cutting
himself off from it. He states, “It’s only after you’ve lost everything, that you’re free to do
anything” (1:39:58). He lives in an abandoned decaying home, without television, rejecting what
is perceived as the very symbol of consumerism. His primary source of income is making soap
out of fat that he steals from liposuction clinics, and selling it for a hefty profit. The entirety of
Tyler’s being is a total rejection of contemporary life. Although this is an extreme detachment
11 from consumer culture, it gives Tyler the freedom to live life the way he wants, liberating him
from the shackles of modern society and giving him a sense of meaning in his life. In this way,
Fight Club rejects the value system where commodities indicate a person’s worth, and rejects the
consumerist way of seeking fulfillment through the attainment of material possessions. Rather
the film suggests that fulfillment is found in doing what a person truly desires. This reinforces
the idea that a person must loosen their dependence on consumer goods in order to attain a true
sense of purpose in their lives.
Additionally, a notable scene in the film occurs when Tyler takes the narrator into a
convenience store. The narrator is shocked when Tyler suddenly takes out a gun and pulls the
store clerk out the back door, placing the gun right to the clerk’s head. Tyler questions the clerk
about what he really wants to do in life instead of working at the store. He admits that he wants
to become a veterinarian but there is too much education required. Tyler takes his ID card and
threatens to find him and kill him if he “is not on his way to becoming a veterinarian in six
weeks” (1:23:23). This scene is unique as it portrays the film’s philosophy of action. It rejects the
laziness and stagnation associated with conforming to society’s expectations and not chasing
one’s true dreams. It conveys the idea that individuals must push themselves in order to escape
the monotonous routine of the consumer world and strive to find meaning in their everyday
being. In this way, Fight Club teaches the lesson of not wasting one's potential and lacking the
motivation to achieve one’s goals, as this is what can allow a person to attain purpose in a
consumerist society.
The Reclamation of Identity Through Violence
Similar to how Fight Club conveys a message about battling consumerism to attain a
sense of purpose, it also conveys a message about reclaiming identity and masculinity through
12 violence. The film examines the notion of men returning to their primal form of masculinity,
where natural urges, aggressive nature, and violence are encouraged, similar to how Tyler desires
civilization to return to a primal state where consumerism does not hinder the lives of American
men. Tyler establishes a ‘Fight Club’, a secret association in which men fight each other with
their bare fists. At the beginning of one of the Fight Club meetings, Tyler states, “We're the
middle children of the history, no purpose or place, we have no Great war, no Great depression,
our great war is a spiritual war, our great depression is our lives” (1:10:42-58). Tyler explains
how men in contemporary society do not have traditional ways of attaining a sense of purpose.
Consequently, men must struggle to find meaning and fulfillment in a world that lacks a clear
path laid out for them. The establishment of Fight Club seeks to give them a clear path; it aims to
help men reverse the effects of consumerism and emasculation, and give them a sense of
purpose. It does this by resorting to physical violence in an attempt to reawaken the senses that
have been numbed due to the monotony of corporate America. The pain of violence reminds
these men that they are alive and invigorates them as the narrator states, “You weren't alive
anywhere like you were there” referring to the basement of a bar where the fights take place.
(0:44:12-14). Fight Club being a secluded association also makes men feel like they are equals,
not competitors, and helps to eliminate the feeling of alienation that is so prevalent in a
consumerist society. James Oleson (2007) articulates this well in his paper: “In a world of
veneers, fight club promises something solid and authentic—authentic pain—and men from all
walks of life seek it out hungrily: stockbrokers and muscle-men, waiters and supply clerks,
priests and platinum pretty boys” (p. 584). As pointed out by the narrator, “Fight Club [is not]
about winning or losing” (0:45:56-59). Rather it is a radical form of therapy. It unites men and
allows them to express primal behaviour in order to overcome the feelings that come from being
13 disenfranchised victims of commodity culture.
Figure 3. Fight scene between two members of Fight Club (0:43:56).
The fight scenes in the film consist of clever camera work, using close-up and
first-person shots to emphasize the brutality and violence of the clashes. The sound effects are
quite unsettling, as in many scenes, the audience is able to hear the sound of flesh being torn and
faces being bloodied. The dim lighting also helps to convey the illegal and anarchic nature of the
underground fight club and helps to create a tense and thrilling atmosphere. In addition, the very
violent and self-destructive nature of Fight Club makes it clear that it is against body perfection,
a cultural idea that has become increasingly propagated in advertising and mass media. The men
in the film reject the notion that they should look a certain way as they violently attack each
other, breaking their bones and busting their lips in the process. Being a part of Fight Club means
that the men no longer feel obligated to fit in with the rest of society and succumb to the
pressures of looking perfect at all times.
Thus, the theme of violence in Fight Club serves as a method of attaining a sense of
purpose in one's life. Due to the pain and physical exertion that the men endure, they achieve
enlightenment and a way to express their bottled-up anger and frustration. It allows them to
14 regain control over their lives and reclaim their masculinity and independence from the cultural
expectations that are imposed on them by contemporary society. The men that joined the Fight
Club are no longer soft, emasculated men. Rather they have been “saved” and are “carved of
wood” (0:46:27, 0:44:37).
The Rejection of Nihilism
Although Tyler helps the narrator better his life and find purpose, he also attempts to lead
him astray. This is because of Tyler’s nihilistic attitude. Nihilism can be defined as the rejection
of the beliefs and values associated with traditional social structures (Crosby, 1998). Tyler is
anti-establishment and believes that individuals should embrace destruction against the
consumerist society. This leads him to create ‘Project Mayhem’, an extremist organization that
seeks total obliteration of civilization as a way of addressing the source of masculine
suppression. It may seem like the film is conveying a message about nihilism and anarchy, yet
this is disapproved in the final scene of the film. In this scene, the narrator shoots himself in his
cheek, thereby purposefully killing his alter ego, Tyler (2:13:24). This symbolizes the dismissal
of Tyler’s nihilistic attitude and desire for destruction. As such, the film rejects the notion that
life is meaningless and that the consumerist society should be destroyed. Rather it perpetuates
the idea that individuals should believe in what they wish to believe in. By killing Tyler, the
narrator was able to fall in love with Marla and reject the anti-establishment views of Tyler, and
in doing so, live in accordance with his own values.
Altogether, Fight Club presents a message about finding fulfillment by tackling
consumerism and the issues that arise from it. It presents solutions to the domestication and
emasculation that are prevalent in a consumerist society, and tells a dramatic tale about how men
must go to great lengths to attain true fulfillment in their lives.
15 V. Conclusion
In summary, David Fincher's film adaptation of Fight Club written by Chuck Palahniuk is
a complex work that highlights the cultural crisis that stems from a society that is driven by
consumerism, and the effect this cultural crisis has on men. It illustrates how consumerism has
caused men to live tedious and domesticated lives, where they have become obsessed with
irrelevant material objects and inconsequential social status, causing their existence to be void of
any true meaning. The film also insists that men have become emasculated by consumer culture,
causing them to become soft and feminized individuals, who lack a sense of who they really are.
Hence, the film is essentially a critique of consumer culture, depicting the significant impact of
consumerism and the multitude of issues that it brings. Yet at the same time, it illustrates how
due to the challenges faced by men in a consumerist society, they must struggle to attain a sense
of purpose and fulfillment in their lives. As explored in this essay, the film suggests that men
must detach themselves from materialism, reject conformity to society’s ideals, return to a primal
form of masculinity, and live in accordance with their own values. All in all, this would allow
them to attain a true sense of direction in their lives. In this way, the film is a representation of
men’s journey to find purpose in life, especially when consumerism has them feeling trapped and
unsatisfied. Ultimately, Fight Club offers enlightenment to its male audience, forcing them to
reconsider their whole lives and question what really brings them fulfillment in contemporary
society.
16 VI. References
Bedard, M. (2020, September 13). Deny Expectations: Postmodernism in Film Explained.
StudioBinder. https://www.studiobinder.com/blog/what-is-postmodernism-definition/
Crosby, D. A. (1998). Nihilism. Routledge Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
https://doi.org/10.4324/9780415249126-n037-1
Fincher, D. (Director). (1999). Fight Club. Twentieth Century Fox.
Giroux, H. (2001). Private Satisfactions and Public Disorders: “Fight Club”, Patriarchy, and the
Politics of Masculine Violence. JAC, 21(1), 1–31. https://www.jstor.org/stable/20866386
Harmanci, N. (2017). Consumerism is the Core Ideology of the Capitalism. International
Journal of Business, Humanities and Technology, 7(4).
https://www.ijbhtnet.com/journals/Vol_7_No_4_December_2017/8.pdf
Heffernan, T. (2016). When the Movie Is Better Than the Book: Fight Club, Consumption, and
Vital Signs. Framework: The Journal of Cinema and Media, 57(2), 91–103.
https://doi.org/10.13110/framework.57.2.0091
Oleson, J. (2007). Is Tyler Durden Insane? NDL Rev., 83(2).
https://www.academia.edu/627026/Is_Tyler_Durden_Insane
Paul, S. (2011). Fighting for their place: Constructing masculinity in Chuck Palahniuk’s “Fight
Club” [PDF].
https://www.proquest.com/openview/2201c8d4e8a7832ca76c045fdd7c6eff/1?pq-origsite
=gscholar&cbl=18750
Thorstein Veblen. (1899). The Theory of the Leisure Class. Macmillan.